=head1 NAME

kalendas - Calendar Calculations

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<kalendas> [I<option>] [I<arguments>]

=head1 ABSTRACT

kalendas is a perl script to make calendar calculations. The
computations are developed on three systems of dating: the Julian
calendar, the Gregorian calendar and the system of numbering of
Julian day/date.

 Keywords:
   Julian Calendar, Gregorian calendar, Julian date.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The Julian and Gregorian calendars are dating systems used by the
Western or Christian Culture: the Julian calendar, introduced by
the triumvirate Julius Caesar in the 46 b.C., was used until 1582
A.D., epoch which was corrected through reform ordered by Pope
Gregory XIII and who gave origin to the Gregorian calendar,
calendar of use common in the present time. Both calendars
considered the same months and days, but they differ in the
counting of leap years. The system of numbering of Julian days
consists in to count the days (including fractions of day) since a
reference date until a specified date and its use is common in
astronomy and chronology.

The computations have by objective to convert dates among the
three dating systems mentioned above. Most algorithms implemented
using the function module (the remainder of the division between
two integers numbers) in order to handle integer variables along
of the calculation, since the calendars handle integers numbers,
except the system numbering of Julian day/date that contains part
decimal because of the fraction of day.

=head1 OPTIONS

=head2 I. Arguments

B<Note>: Writing quotes (C<"">) is obligatory for input of arguments.

=over 6

=item 'era'

Is the position of the year in the Christian scale. With 'C<aC>' denotes
ante Christium or before Christ; 'C<AD>', Anno Domini or common era.

=item 'yy'

The year with a number greater than zero. The year zero or a year negative
does not exist in the Christian scale.

=item 'mm'

The month with numerical value: Jan-E<gt>1, Feb-E<gt>2, ...

=item 'dd'

The day of the month.

=item 'tt'

The solar time, has two options of entrance: writing the time
universal (UT) in format 'C<hh:mm:ss>', or 'C<md>' that is the
hour to noon of Greenwich (12:00:00 UT).

=item 'jd'

The Julian date. The integer and decimal parts the 'C<jd>'
represent the Julian day number and Julian day fraction
respectively. With five numbers decimals the time is
obtained with precision of 1 second. 'C<jd>' can be a negative
number.

=item 'mjd'

The modified Julian date. The integer and decimal parts the 'C<mjd>'
represent the modified Julian day number and modified Julian day
fraction respectively. With five numbers decimals the time is
obtained with precision of 1 second. 'C<mjd>' can be a negative
number.

=back

=head2 II. Functions

=over 4

=item --calc2FJ "(era,yy,mm,dd,tt)"

Calculation of Julian date from a calendar date used in the
Christian or Western culture. This function assumes the calendars
used in Western culture: the Gregorian calendar, currently used
for civil purposes, and its predecessor, the Julian calendar, used
by the old Roman Empire with use until end of century XVI.
Therefore, for a date previous to the 5 of October of 1582 the
Julian calendar is assumed, whereas for a date later to the 14 of
October of 1582 the Gregorian calendar is assumed.

=item --jul2FJ "(era,yy,mm,dd,tt)"

Calculation of Julian date from a Julian calendar date.
The function assumes only the Julian calendar.

=item --greg2FJ "(era,yy,mm,dd,tt)"

Calculation of Julian date from a Gregorian calendar date.
The function assumes only the Gregorian calendar.

=item --FJ2jul "(jd)"

Calculation of a Julian calendar date, time and day of the week
from a Julian date. It gives the date with format day of week,
era, year, month, day and time UT.

=item --FJ2greg "(jd)"

Calculation of a Gregorian calendar date, time and day of the week
from a Julian date. It gives the date with format day of week,
era, year, month, day and time UT.

=item --calc2FJM "(era,yy,mm,dd,tt)"

Calculation of modified Julian date from date calendar Western. The
function is valid for any era.

=item --FJM2calc "(mjd)"

Calculation of a Western calendar date, time and day of the week
from a modified Julian date. It gives the date with format day of
week, era, year, month, day and time UT.

=item --convcal "(era,yy,mm,dd,cal1,cal2)"

Conversion between calendar date 'C<cal1>' to calendar date 'C<cal2>'.
The conversion is made between Julian 'C<jul>' and Gregorian 'C<greg>'
calendars or vice versa. It gives the date with format era, year,
month and day.

=item --mas fun

Show additional information about function 'C<fun>', where 'C<fun>' is
one of the options:

 'calc2FJ|jul2FJ|greg2FJ|FJ2jul|FJ2greg|calc2FJM|FJM2calc|convcal|mas|arg'

The option 'C<arg>' shows additional information on the arguments.

=item -h, --help

Show summary of functions and arguments.

=item -v, --version

Show program version.

=back

If parameters do not exist in the command line, it evaluates the
Julian date from the PC clock.

=head1 EXAMPLES

In the following examples, write function and arguments in the
same form as found.

=over 6

=item *

Various astronomical applications refer to the time J2000, defined
as the Julian date of 1 January of the 2000 A.D. a noon of Greenwich
(12:00:00 UT). Julian date for this moment is:

      kalendas --calc2FJ "(AD,2000,1,1,md)"
      FJ = 2451545.00000

=item *

The Julian date of 15 March of the 44 a.C. to 5:45:35 UT is:

      kalendas --calc2FJ "(aC,44,3,15,5:45:35)"
      FJ = 1705425.73999

=item *

The Julian date of day 3 of September of 1752 A.D. (Julian
calendar) at midnight of Greenwich (00:00:00 UT) is:

      kalendas --jul2FJ "(AD,1752,09,03,00:00:00)"
      FJ = 2361221.50000

the Julian date of day 14 of September of 1752 A.D. (Gregorian
calendar) at midnight of Greenwich (00:00:00 UT) is:

      kalendas --greg2FJ "(AD,1752,09,14,00:00:00)"
      FJ = 2361221.50000

It is observed that both calendars agree with the same Julian date.
Of fact, in this date Great Britain and its colonies adopted the
Gregorian calendar.

=item *

N. Armstrong walked onto the lunar ground in Julian date
2440421.62278. The respective dates Julian and Gregorian
calendar of historic moment are:

      kalendas --FJ2jul "(2440421.62278)"
      Data: Saturday, AD 1969-7-6, 02:56:48 UT
      kalendas --FJ2greg "(2440421.62278)"
      Data: Saturday, AD 1969-7-19, 02:56:48 UT

=item *

The modified Julian date of day 19 of December of 2014 to
18:57:27 UT is:

      kalendas --calc2FJM "(AD,2014,12,19,18:57:27)"
      MJD = 57010.78990

inverse operation retrieves the starting date

      kalendas --FJM2calc "(57010.78990)"
      Data: Friday, AD 2014-12-19, 18:57:27 UT

=item *

Convert the date 1 January of the 1 A.D. Julian calendar to
Gregorian calendar

      kalendas --convcal "(AD,1,1,1,jul,greg)"
      Data: (aC,1,12,30)

of course the inverse operation retrieves the starting date

      kalendas --convcal "(aC,1,12,30,greg,jul)"
      Data: (AD,1,1,1)

=item *

To calculate the current Julian date from the PC clock

      kalendas

=back

=head1 DIAGNOSTICS

kalendas returns one of the following messages, with
interruption of the program, by incorrect input of arguments.

=over 4

=item 'Many arguments!'

The option required has more of an argument or the quotes were omitted.
Strings separated by spaces or commas (C<--fun arg1 arg2,arg3 ...>)
are considered as arguments; therefore each option requires an
argument in quotes. View Examples.

=item 'Bad input date!'

The arguments entered by command line do not adjust the format
required by the function. Each argument must be enclosed in
parentheses. For Julian date calculations the argument 'C<era>' only
supports strings 'C<aC>' or 'C<AD>', 'C<yy,mm,dd>' admit only positive
integers numbers, the time 'C<tt>' admits the string 'C<md>' or time
format UT 'C<hh:mm:ss>' with positive integers numbers. For calendar
date calculations 'C<jd>' is a positive or negative real number.
View Examples.

=item 'Conversion between calendars equals!!!'

The option C<--convcal> only converts between calendars Julian and/or
Gregorian. Obviously, there is not nothing else to comment!

=item 'There is not information for: argx'

The argument 'C<argx>' does not correspond to the functions of
kalendas. In order to remember the functions of the program,
write 'C<--help>'.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

  Miguel Molina <mmolina.unphysics@gmail.com>

=head1 VERSION

C<kalendas>, version 1.3.1, $Date: 2018/07/15 11:01:23 $

=head1 LICENSE

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program. If not, see E<lt>http://www.gnu.org/licenses/E<gt>.
